# JOPA Example 01 - JOPA + Sesame + OWL2Java

This project is a basic example of JOPA usage. It uses a Sesame in-memory storage and a small model based on the UOBM ontology 
([https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/isg/tools/UOBMGenerator/](https://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/isg/tools/UOBMGenerator/)).

There are two setups for this demo:

### Generated Model

This example uses an object model generated by OWL2Java. The generation is done as part of maven build and the generated
entities can be found in the `cz.cvut.kbss.jopa.example01.generated.model` package. The demo can be started using the 
`cz.cvut.kbss.jopa.example01.ExampleGenerated` class.

OWL2Java generates the classes based on integrity constraints in the `ic-example01.owl` file.

Technical constructs like operation cascading and lazy/eager loading have to be added manually.

*Note: Currently the generator always rewrites the whole classes, so no added code is preserved on maven rebuild.*

### Hand-written Model

This example uses a hand-written object model. The model does not contain all the constraints present in the generated-model,
but the attributes are, with the exception of annotation properties and @Properties, the same.
 
The model can be found in the `cz.cvut.kbss.jopa.example01.model` package and the demo can be run by starting the 
`cz.cvut.kbss.jopa.example01.Example` class.


## Persistence Setup

The persistence is set up in `cz.cvut.kbss.jopa.example01.PersistenceFactory`. A Sesame volatile (in-memory) storage without
inference is used.

## Running the Demo

To run the demo, `mvn exec:java` can be used. However, make sure that `mvn package` or `mvn install` is executed first.

- To run the demo with the manually written object model, use `mvn exec:java@manual`*.
- To run the demo with the generated object model, use `mvn exec:java@generated`*.

*_Note that this requires Apache Maven 3.3.1 or later. If you have an older version, you can specify the object type model as 
command line argument in the following way:_ `mvn exec:java -Dexec.args=manual/generated`.
